Betaherpesviruses, including human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), are common human pathogens, yet only a small percentage of infected people experience acute illness [1]. In people with impaired immune systems, HCMV-mediated infections can be life-threatening. Despite significant advancements in diagnostic and therapeutic management of the disease, HCMV poses a serious threat in solid organ and hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients as well as in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome patients [2]. In addition, HCMV infection in utero is the leading cause of congenital infection that can result in developmental abnormalities, including sensorineural hearing loss, developmental delays, and even fetal death [3,4,5].
There are currently no commercially available vaccines to prevent HCMV infection [6] and only a small number of drugs, including ganciclovir, valganciclovir, cidofovir, foscarnet, maribavir, and letermovir, have been Food and Drug Administration approved for the treatment/prophylaxis of HCMV infection and disease [7,8]. Moreover, drug resistance is increasingly common with circulating strains acquiring UL54 (polymerase) and/or UL97 (kinase) mutations that confer resistance to commonly available drugs [9,10,11]. Therefore, the identification of newer anti-HCMV drugs with improved efficacy and novel modes of action are essentially needed.
Heparan sulfate (HS) is present on the cell surface as well as in the extracellular matrix of most mammalian tissues [12,13]. Numerous viruses including HCMV attach to host cells by first engaging with cell surface HS glycosaminoglycan chains, followed by interaction with the specific protein receptors, which results in virus entry [14,15]. HCMV can infect different types of cells and tissues indicating that it can engage with a wide variety of host cell receptors to enter the cell and establish an infection [16,17,18,19]. Specific viral glycoproteins engage these structurally and functionally distinct receptors that include the platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha, cellular integrins, neuropilin-2, and epidermal growth factor receptor [20,21,22,23,24,25,26].
Earlier, our group showed that HCMV preferentially binds to uniquely sulfated and polymerized HS using its surface glycoprotein B (gB) [15]. HS mimetics, including heparin, bind to gB and inhibit HCMV infection by competitively inhibiting virus attachment to the cell surface [15,27]. Heparin is composed of disaccharide-repeating units (Figure 1A) and is an efficient anticoagulant; it can cause excessive bleeding and thrombocytopenia that necessitate close patient observation and, if necessary, the administration of an antidote (protamine) [28,29]. Two potential solutions to these anticoagulant side effects are using either the naturally potent anti-viral sulfated glycans with lower anticoagulant properties or the dissociation of the anticoagulant and anti-viral properties of the existing heparin. We were able to provide instances of both in our earlier work [28,30,31]. In contrast to heparin, a newly discovered fucosylated chondroitin sulfate (FucCS) from the body wall of the sea cucumber Pentacta pygmaea (PpFucCS) was found to have significantly lower anticoagulant activity but significant antiviral efficacy against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) [28]. The PpFucCS anticoagulant activity can be further reduced by hydrolysis into oligosaccharide fractions [30].
In the current investigation, PpFucCS (Figure 1B) was used to target HS–virus interaction and prevent HCMV entry into cells. We show that PpFucCS has significant antiviral activity against HCMV and that, when hydrolyzed into fractions, the oligosaccharides lose their anti-HCMV activity in a size-dependent manner.
For virus yield reduction assays, the HFFs were pretreated for 1 h with a range of concentrations (50 μg/mL, 25 μg/mL, 12.5 μg/mL, 6.25 μg/mL, 3.12 μg/mL, 1.56 μg/mL, and 0.78 μg/mL), of PpFucCS and mock (in duplicates of two independent experiments), and then infected with HCMV at a MOI of 3. The samples were harvested within the medium at 5 dpi by scraping the cells and stored at −80 °C before titration. On the day of titration, the harvested samples were sonicated three times for 10 s each with a 30 s gap. The monolayers of the HFFs were grown in 12-well tissue culture plates, and serial dilutions of the sonicated samples in the DMEM (without any additional compounds) were absorbed onto them for 1 h (in duplicates), followed by washing thrice with serum-free DMEM. For the viral titers, fresh DMEM containing 10% FBS and gamma immunoglobulin was added to the HFFs. At this step, no native PpFucCS was added to the overlayed medium, and the cells were incubated for from 9 to 10 dpi. At the endpoint, the DMEM overlay was removed, and the cells were washed 2X using PBS. The infected HFFs were then fixed in 100% methanol for 5 min. The HFFs were immediately stained using Modified Giemsa stain (Sigma-Aldrich, Milli-pore Sigma, Burlington, MA, USA, catalog No. GS1L) for 15 minutes. the plates were then washed with tap water and air dried, and the dark stained plaques were quantified.
Here, we investigated the inhibitory activity of both native PpFucCS and its LMW fractions against HCMV. The LMW PpFucCS oligosaccharides studied here were used to establish a structural activity relationship and the influence of MW distribution on its anti-viral activity against HCMV.
The native PpFucCS exhibited potent and efficacious inhibitory activity against HCMV while the PpFucCS fractions showed decreased activity in both potency and efficacy (Figure 2A). Comparing the mean inhibition at the highest concentration used (50 μg/mL), we show that the efficacy of native PpFucCS along with the unfractionated but hydrolyzed PpFucCS oligosaccharide mixture (HdPpFucCS) and Fr1 was comparable to UFH, but it was significantly lower in the case of Fr2, Fr3, and Fr4 (Figure 2B). Additionally, the native PpFucCS had the least half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) value amongst all the tests and was comparable to that of UFH (Table 1). Thus, based on the comparison of low MW PpFucCS products, it is evident that HdPpFucCS and Fr1 maintain better antiviral activity than Fr2, Fr3, and Fr4 while displaying only slightly less activity than native PpFucCS and UFH. Earlier, our 1D 1H NMR spectra showed the presence of four fucose units in Fr1–Fr3 that were similar to the native PpFucCS structure: α- Fuc2,4S, α-Fuc2,4S, α-Fuc4S, and α-Fuc0S [30]. This indicates that, although Fr1–Fr3 differ in size, they have similar structures. The Fuc anomeric peaks in fraction 4 showed an upfield 1H shift, which may indicate desulfation. Interestingly, the Fenton chemistry demonstrated a preserved structural integrity of the native PpFucCS in the majority of the oligosaccharides produced (Fr1–Fr3), and only a small percentage of the very low MW (Fr4) showed more chemical modifications [30]. Combining these recently published results with the current results, it is evident that PpFucCS oligosaccharides lose their anti-HCMV activity in a size-dependent manner and that structural features play a crucial role in their anti-viral activity.
To study the inhibition of progeny virion formation and virus growth, we performed a virus yield reduction assay (at MOI 3.0). The IC50 obtained by performing this assay (2.957 µg/mL) (Figure S1) is very close to the IC50 (3.6 µg/mL) determined by the GFP reduction assay conducted at a low MOI (0.01) (Table 1), thus indicating that the inhibitory properties of PpFucCS against HCMV do not depend on the MOI.
To assess whether PpFucCS inhibits the entry of HCMV into cells (HFFs), we utilized the TowneBAC strain of the HCMV labeled with a self-quenching fluorescent label (R18 fluorescence assay). The fluorescence was recorded at different time intervals starting from 0 to 60 min post infection (Figure 3). The R18 dye transitions from one monolayer of a fluid-state phospholipid bilayer membrane to another in a potential-dependent manner, somewhat relieving the quenching of its fluorescence [35]. The fluorescence from the HCMV virus particles that have been labeled with high quantities of R18 is highly self-quenched and their fusion with the host cell membrane leads to an increase in fluorescence, which is often visible only after the virus has entered the cell. A significantly higher number of virus particles entered the mock-treated cells compared to the cells treated with native PpFucCS at 60 min post infection (Figure 3A,B).
PpFucCS and its oligosaccharides do not exhibit any significant cytotoxicity against primary HFF cells when examined at the highest concentration used in the antiviral assay (50 μg/mL) (Figure 4A) and show a protective effect against virus-induced cell death at five days post infection (Figure 4B) when examined using a trypan blue exclusion assay. Notably, the Fr3 and Fr4 that did not show any significant antiviral activity (Figure 2) also did not show any significant protection from virus-induced cell death. Furthermore, we did not see any cytotoxic effect on the HFFs when treated with the native PpFucCS at 500 μg/mL for five days using the trypan blue exclusion assay (Figure S2). To corroborate these findings, we treated the HFFs with the native PpFucCS at 500 μg/mL and 50 μg/mL along with heparin control for five days and performed the ATP release assay (Figure S3).
In this study, we demonstrated that PpFucCS and its hydrolyzed fractions efficiently inhibit the HCMV infection of primary human fibroblasts, specifically blocking virus entry into the cells. The treatment of HFFs with native PpFucCS and its oligosaccharides did not affect the cell viability for the duration of treatment, thus confirming that the observed reduction in the virus titer was not because of cytotoxicity. Moreover, when the HFFs were pretreated and maintained in these marine glycans throughout the course of infection, the cells resisted infection-induced cell death. To confirm that PpFucCS has a direct impact on virus entry, we used HCMV labeled with self-quenching dye that only fluoresces when the virus fuses with the cell membrane. This experiment showed the significant effect of PpFucCS on HCMV entry.
GAGs are composed of repeating disaccharide units that contain an amino sugar (either GalNAc or GlcNAc) and a uronic acid (either IdoA or GlcA) or the neutral sugar galactose. GAGs have a variety of biological functions, including cell signaling, proliferation, and wound healing, as a result of their structural diversity, and are ubiquitously found on the surface of cells, where they act as receptors and signals for cellular and pathogenic processes [36]. Viruses or other pathogens utilize this structural diversity of GAGs to selectively bind and enter the cells [37]. The virion attachment caused by GAG binding and eventual entry are usually independent events, with attachment assumed to be mostly nonspecific and charge-dependent but, instead, entry is thought to be driven by highly specific protein–protein interactions. We have recently shown that HS–virus interactions are specific and depend on a defined structural functional relationship [12,15,28]. Interactions with HS are a frequent prerequisite for many viral infections [38,39]. As a result, inhibitors targeting virus–HS interactions have the potential to function as broad-spectrum antivirals that could have a significant influence on global health.
Many compounds including small organic and inorganic compounds, as well as polycationic peptides, have been employed to bind to HS and thereby protect the cells from viral attachment [40,41,42,43]. Conversely, inhibitors may bind to virion components to sequester and inactivate the virions very similarly to neutralizing antibodies [44]. These are mostly HS mimetics, and many of them have broad-spectrum antiviral action. In this study, we investigated the anti-HMCV activities of two GAGs: (i) heparin, a highly sulfated linear GAG widely exploited as in research [45], and (ii) PpFucCS, a unique marine branched GAG. From our results, we were able to compare the anti-HCMV activity of PpFucCS and its LWW fractions with the commonly used control heparin. Since the use of heparin can lead to excessive bleeding and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, PpFucCS offers a reasonable alternative to be developed as an antiviral.
The inhibitory activities of the LMW PpFucCS derivatives were proportional to their chain lengths. The native high MW structure is necessary to achieve maximum HMCV inhibition. Upon hydrolysis (depolymerization) to generate the oligosaccharide mixture (HdPpFuCS), the activity was considerably decreased. However, Fr1 had more anti-HMCV activity compared to HdPpFucCS, most likely because HdPpFucCS has significant amounts of less active components (Fr2–Fr4: nearly 3/4 of the amount). Moreover, Fr4 has a degraded structure. All the PpFucCS fractions (Fr1–Fr3) show the same 1D 1H NMR spectral profile as the native, therefore indicating they have the same structure [30]. The only exception is Fr4, which was spectrally different and structurally degraded.
We recently observed a similar behavior of MW dependence on anticoagulation and anti-SARS-CoV-2 actions of PpFucCS [30]. However, for the sulfated galactan from the red alga Botryocladia occidentalis (BoSG), the reduction in the chain length was able to dissociate the anticoagulant and anti-SARS-CoV-2 activities [31]. The results from this current work support the first case, in which the high MW of the marine sulfated glycan, in this case PpFucCS, is a key element for the biological activity. The current results regarding the anti-HCMV activity of PpFucCS perfectly match our recent findings regarding the anticoagulation and anti-SARS-CoV-2 action of PpFucCS [30].
The current results demonstrate the antiviral activities of marine sulfated glycan PpFucCS against HCMV, which is an enveloped DNA virus. Earlier, our group successfully used a copper-based Fenton approach for the free-radical depolymerization of PpFucCS to produce oligosaccharides with shorter chain lengths but preserved the structural integrity, so it was similar to the native PpFucCS [30]. Our findings imply that a native PpFucCS structure with a large MW is essential for achieving the greatest anti-HCMV activity. The retained effective inhibitory potential of high MW structures derived from PpFucCS suggests this marine glycan is a promising candidate for further evaluation and development as a potential antiviral.