In an on-going Microbial Observatory experiment on the International Space Station (ISS), multiple biosafety level 2 (BSL-2) bacterial isolates were isolated, identified, and whole-genome sequences (WGS) were generated. The genomic data enables the determination of the microgravity influence on pathogenicity and virulence in these microorganisms by comparison to type strains of the corresponding species.
Two multidrug-resistant Enterobacter sp. isolates were found in the waste and hygiene compartment (WHC) location. Species of Enterobacter cloacae complex (Ecc) are commonly found in the environment, but are of high clinical significance (2).
In this study, the draft genomes sequences of 20 strains from the ISS were obtained. WGS sequencing was performed on an Illumina NextSeq instrument with a paired-end module. The A5 assembly pipeline version 20150522 was used to generate draft assemblies applying the default parameter settings (9) and annotated with the help of the Rapid Annotations using Subsystems Technology (RAST) (10). Table 1 summarizes assembly statistics (number of contigs, total genome size, N50 size, median coverage, G+C percentage, error corrected reads used for assembly, and number of coding sequences). The raw reads were in the range of 24 to 82 Mbp per genome. The G+C content was in the range of 31.5 to 38.7% for Staphylococcus species and A. pittii; for other strains the G+C contents were 55.2 to 55.8%. The subsystem features created using RAST for all 20 strains are depicted in Table 1.
Statistics summary for the 20 draft ISS BSL-2 bacterial genome sequences
WHC, waste and hygiene compartment.
PMM port 1, permanent multipurpose module.
The WGS data were deposited at DDBL/EMBL/GenBank under the accession no. listed in Table 1 and at the NASA GeneLab system (GLDS-67; https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/genelab/accession/GLDS-67/##). The version described in this paper is the first version. The strains were deposited in the USDA Agricultural Research Station (NRRL) and German culture collections.