Human society faces an acceleration of water scarcity due to increasing population, pollution, and land use. Such water scarcity also brings a decrease in water quality, as demonstrated by increased eutrophication, among other concerns (1). Treatment and reuse of water are critical tools in combating water stress globally. Reuse of wastewater carries the potential risk of transmission of small-molecule metabolites and antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) (2), while its use relieves stress on natural sources of water. Previously, biofilms were sampled from the Orange County Water District (OCWD) Advanced Water Purification Facility (AWPF) in Southern California, which showed differences in the microbial communities in both influent and biofilms on microfiltration and reverse osmosis membranes (3). In a recent study that more fully characterized both biofilms and large volumes of water throughout the treatment process, we described both microbial diversity and load decreasing across this well-engineered system (4). Here, we have expanded and enhanced this previous work (4) by identifying metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) that contain ARGs to expand our knowledge of all microbial lineages harboring ARGs that are present within an ultrapurified water facility.
Water and biofilm were sampled at the OCWD AWPF as previously described (4). Briefly, all water samples were filtered using a large-volume concentrator (LVC) dialysis filter cartridge system (Innova Prep LLC, Drexel, MO). Approximately 60 to 100 liters of water were filtered per sample, prior to concentration onto replicate 25-mm (diameter), 0.22-μm (pore size) nitrocellulose filters. Filters were placed in BashingBead lysis tubes (Zymo, Inc., Irvine, CA) containing 750 μl of DNA/RNA Shield (Zymo, Inc.) to preserve samples onsite. Biofilm samples were similarly placed in lysis tubes with DNA/RNA Shield. DNA was extracted using the Zymo Microbiomics DNA/RNA coextraction kit (Zymo, Inc.). Libraries were prepared as previously described in full (4) using the Nextera XT library prep kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA), modified to use 13 cycles of PCR. All samples were sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 3000 instrument using PE150 chemistry. Two biofilm samples from filtration units at the AWPF obtained from Leddy et al. (3) were processed as described previously and sequenced using SE100 chemistry. Sequence reads were error corrected using BayesHammer v3.12.0 (5) and assembled using MEGAHIT v1.1.3 (6) to produce a single coassembly. Reads were mapped to the assembly with Bowtie 2 v2.3.4.1 (7) and binned into MAGs using Anvi’o v v5 and CONCOCT (8, 9). MAG completion and redundancy estimates were also computed within Anvi’o. MAGs were queried for ARGs using DeepARG (10) and identified phylogenetically by GTDB-Tk v0.3.0 (11). Default parameters were used for all software unless otherwise noted.
A total of 95 MAGs were selected after manual curation within Anvi’o and by DeepARG that contained 185 open reading frames putatively identified as antimicrobial resistance genes. Of note, two MAGs were identified by GTDB-Tk as belonging to the “Candidatus Gracilibacteria” and “Candidatus Patescibacteria” lineages (12). Others identified included an unclassified Dongiaceae MAG that was previously associated with a wastewater treatment facility (13). A more detailed list of assembly statistics and taxonomy of all MAGs can be found in Table 1. As reported previously, no metagenomic sequence and therefore no MAGs were identified after barrier filtration within the system due to a lack of sufficient extractable or amplifiable DNA (4). Future work will further describe the ARGs and will identify non-ARG-containing MAGs and determine how they impact the operation of the OCWD AWPF.
Detailed taxonomy, accession information, and assembly statistics of MAGs
Taxonomy given was identified using GTDB-tk and is the taxonomy reported within the NCBI accession record.
Raw sequence reads are available under BioProject accession number PRJNA428383. Whole-genome sequences are available under the sequential BioSample accession numbers SAMN10026417 to SAMN10026511, which include annotations produced with the Prokaryotic Gene Annotation Pipeline (PGAP). Table 1 contains individual Web links to each bin assembly and annotation.