Fungi are potential sources of nutrients and bioactive compounds during long-term spaceflight but also could affect astronaut health through both opportunistic infections and system biofouling (1, 2). As part of a study characterizing fungal responses to the space environment, we report the draft genomes of 94 fungal strains that were isolated from the International Space Station (ISS), representing 10 ascomycetous and 1 basidiomycetous species.
Sample collection and fungal isolation steps were described elsewhere (26). For five flight missions, eight surfaces aboard the ISS were sampled with moistened polyester wipes (Table 1). Upon return to Earth, the wipes were agitated in sterile phosphate-buffered saline, which was concentrated using an InnovaPrep CP150 concentrating pipette, and suitable aliquots were spread onto nutrient media (Table 1). Fungal isolates were restreaked on potato-dextrose agar (PDA), and genomic DNA was extracted using the ZymoBIOMICS MagBead DNA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Whole-genome shotgun sequencing libraries were prepared with an Illumina Nextera DNA Flex library preparation kit (29) and were sequenced on the NovaSeq 6000 paired-end 2 × 150-bp platform with a S4 flow cell. After quality filtering and trimming with FastQC v0.11.7 (30) and fastp v0.20.0 (31), genomes were assembled using SPAdes v3.11.1 (32). Assembly quality was assessed with QUAST v5.0.2 (33). Fastp included screening for 512 adapters; otherwise, default settings were used for all steps.
Sampling locations, genetic loci used for taxonomic analysis, and WGS assembly quality for fungal species isolated from the ISS during the Microbial Tracking-2 mission
BA, blood agar; R2A, Reasoner’s 2A agar; YPD, yeast extract-peptone-dextrose.
ARED, advanced resistive exercise device; WHC, waste and hygiene compartment; PMM, permanent multipurpose module.
Reference genome was not available; average sequencing depth was calculated from k-mer coverage.
Genus-level identification was made via BLAST searches against the UNITE nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) database (34). Species identification was performed using specific loci suitable for species recognition (Table 1) (35). Homology searches were performed with extracted sequences against the NCBI nucleotide database and in-house Westerdijk Fungal Biodiversity Institute databases containing reference sequences; in case of doubt, identification was confirmed by constructing phylograms.
The whole-genome sequences (WGSs) and raw data have been deposited in GenBank under BioProject accession number PRJNA723004. This project has also been deposited in the NASA GeneLab system (36) under project number GLDS-400. The version described in this paper is the first version.